.\" * jstrftime.3 - Tools for manipulating Jalali representation of Iranian calendar
.\" * and necessary conversations to Gregorian calendar.
.\" * Copyright (C) 2006, 2007, 2009, 2010, 2011 Ashkan Ghassemi.
.\" *
.\" * This file is part of libjalali.
.\" *
.\" * libjalali is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" * it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License as published by
.\" * the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
.\" * (at your option) any later version.
.\" *
.\" * libjalali is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" * but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" * MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" * GNU Lesser General Public License for more details.
.\" *
.\" * You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser General Public License
.\" * along with libjalali.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

.TH JSTRFTIME 3  2011-05-28 "GNU" "libjalali Manual"
.SH NAME
jstrftime \- format jalali date and time
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <jtime.h>
.sp
.BI "size_t jstrftime(char *" s ", size_t " max ", const char *" format ,
.BI "                const struct tm *" jtm );
.fi
.sp
Link with -ljalali
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR jstrftime ()
function formats the broken-down jalali time \fIjtm\fP
according to the format specification \fIformat\fP and places the
result in the character array \fIs\fP of size \fImax\fP.
.PP
The format specification is a null-terminated string and may contain
special character sequences called
.IR "conversion specifications",
each of which is introduced by a \(aq%\(aq character and terminated by
some other character known as a
.IR "conversion specifier character".
All other character sequences are
.IR "ordinary character sequences".
.PP
The characters of ordinary character sequences (including the null byte)
are copied verbatim from \fIformat\fP to \fIs\fP. However, the characters
of conversion specifications are replaced as follows:
.TP
.B %a
The abbreviated weekday name.
.TP
.B %A
The full weekday name.
.TP
.B %b
The abbreviated month name.
.TP
.B %B
The full month name.
.TP
.B %c
The preferred date and time representation.
.TP
.B %C
The century number (year/100) as a 2-digit integer.
.TP
.B %d
The day of the month as a decimal number (range 01 to 31).
.TP
.B %D
Equivalent to
.BR %Y/%m/%d .
.TP
.B %e
Like
.BR %d ,
the day of the month as a decimal number, but a leading
zero is replaced by a space. (SU)
.TP
.B %F
Equivalent to
.B %Y-%m-%d
(the ISO\ 8601 date format). (C99)
.TP
.B %h
The abbreviated Persian transliterated weekday name.
.TP
.B %q
The full Persian transliterated weekday name.
.TP
.B %g
the abbreviated Persian-utf8 weekday name.
.TP
.B %G
the full Persian-utf8 weekday name.
.TP
.B %v
the abbreviated Persian-utf8 month name.
.TP
.B %V
the full Persian-utf8 month name.
.TP
.B %H
The hour as a decimal number using a 24-hour clock (range 00 to 23).
.TP
.B %I
The hour as a decimal number using a 12-hour clock (range 01 to 12).
.TP
.B %j
The day of the year as a decimal number (range 001 to 366).
.TP
.B %k
The hour (24-hour clock) as a decimal number (range 0 to 23);
single digits are preceded by a blank.
(See also
.BR %H .)
(TZ)
.TP
.B %l
The hour (12-hour clock) as a decimal number (range 1 to 12);
single digits are preceded by a blank.
(See also
.BR %I .)
(TZ)
.TP
.B %m
The month as a decimal number (range 01 to 12).
.TP
.B %M
The minute as a decimal number (range 00 to 59).
.TP
.B %n
A newline character. (SU)
.TP
.B %p
Either "AM" or "PM" according to the given time value, or the
corresponding strings for the current locale.
Noon is treated as "PM" and midnight as "AM".
.TP
.B %P
Like
.B %p
but in lowercase: "am" or "pm" or a corresponding
string for the current locale. (GNU)
.TP
.B %r
The time in a.m. or p.m. notation.
In the POSIX locale this is equivalent to
.BR "%I:%M:%S %p" .
(SU)
.TP
.B %R
The time in 24-hour notation (\fB%H:%M\fP). (SU)
For a version including the seconds, see
.B %T
below.
.TP
.B %s
The number of seconds since the Epoch, 1970-01-01 (1348-10-11) 00:00:00 +0000 (UTC). (TZ)
.TP
.B %S
The second as a decimal number (range 00 to 60).
(The range is up to 60 to allow for occasional leap seconds.)
.TP
.B %t
A tab character. (SU)
.TP
.B %T
The time in 24-hour notation (\fB%H:%M:%S\fP). (SU)
.TP
.B %u
The day of the week as a decimal, range 1 to 7, Saturday being 1.
See also
.BR %w .
(SU)
.TP
.B %U
The week number of the current year as a decimal number,
range 00 to 53, starting with the first Sunday as the first day
of week 01.
.TP
.B %w
The day of the week as a decimal, range 0 to 6, Saturday being 0.
See also
.BR %u .
.TP
.B %x
The preferred date representation without the time.
.TP
.B %X
The preferred time representation without the date.
.TP
.B %y
The year as a decimal number without a century (range 00 to 99).
.TP
.B %Y
The year as a decimal number including the century.
.TP
.B %z
The
.I +hhmm
or
.I -hhmm
numeric timezone (that is, the hour and minute offset from UTC). (SU)
.TP
.B %Z
The timezone or name or abbreviation.
.TP
.B %%
A literal \(aq%\(aq character.
.PP
The broken-down time structure \fItm\fP is defined in \fI<jtime.h>\fP.
See also
.BR jctime (3).
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
The
.BR jstrftime ()
function returns the number of characters placed
in the array \fIs\fP, not including the terminating null byte,
provided the string, including the terminating null byte, fits.
Otherwise, it returns max, and the contents of the array is undefined.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The environment variables
.B TZ
and
.B LC_TIME
are used.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
C99.
.SH EXAMPLES
.BR "RFC\ 2822-compliant date format"
(with an English locale for %a and %b)
.PP
.in +2n
"%a,\ %d\ %b\ %Y\ %T\ %z"
.PP
.BR "RFC\ 822-compliant date format"
(with an English locale for %a and %b)
.PP
.in +2n
"%a,\ %d\ %b\ %y\ %T\ %z"
.SS Example Program
The program below can be used to experiment with
.BR jstrftime ().
.PP
Some examples of the result string produced by the libjalali implementation of
.BR jstrftime ()
are as follows:
.in +4n
.nf

.RB "$" " ./a.out \(aq%m\(aq"
Result string is "11"
.fi
.in
.PP
Here's the program source:
.nf

#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <time.h>
#include <jalali.h>
#include <jtime.h>

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    char outstr[200];
    time_t t;
    struct tm *tmp;

    t = time(NULL);
    tmp = jlocaltime(&t);
    if (tmp == NULL) {
        perror("jlocaltime");
        exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
    }

    if (jstrftime(outstr, sizeof(outstr), argv[1], tmp) == 0) {
        fprintf(stderr, "jstrftime returned 0");
        exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
    }

    printf("Result string is \\"%s\\"\\n", outstr);
    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
.fi
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR jdate (1),
.BR jcal (1),
.BR time (2),
.BR jctime (3),
.BR sprintf (3),
.BR jstrptime (3)
.SH COLOPHON
This page is part of release 0.2 of the libjalali
.I man-pages
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Ashkan Ghassemi. <ghassemi@ftml.net>
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Report libjalali bugs to <ghassemi@ftml.net>

libjalali home page: <http://savannah.nongnu.org/projects/jcal/>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 2011 Ashkan Ghassemi.

License LGPLv3+: GNU LGPL version 3 or later
<http://gnu.org/licenses/lgpl.html>.
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it. There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by
law.
